# Ruling the Waves

## Prologue
Digital technologies have allowed entrepreneurs to build empires out of thin air and to challenge governments and traditional authorities. There have been other moments in time that undoubtedly felt very much like the present era. Other entrepreneurs sensed that they were standing on the edge of history, bending authority to their will and reaping fabulous profit along the way. Some of them succeeded beyond their wildest dreams. Many others eventually found themselves caught by a system that bit back and left stranded on what once seemed to be the future.

This book tries to yank the Internet out of the spotlight of the 21st century and back to its older and dimmer roots. What their stories show us is that while technology can gravely wound governments, it rarely kills them. Instead, governments survive because, ironically, both society and entrepreneurs want them. Governments provide the property rights that entrepreneurs eventually want, and the legal stability that commerce craves.

Consider what happened during the first round of the Information Revolution. Up until the 15th century, information was a tightly controlled commodity. Most of the information then was written and the Catholic Church controlled the writing process. The Church sat at the center of all information flows and essentially performed a quasi-governmental function at that time. In 1453 Gutenberg devised a rudimentary printing press. The technology was rather straightforward, but its implications wreaked slow-boiling havoc on Europe's established social order. The more access people had to printing technologies, the more freedom they had to challenge the Church and to break its monopoly on priestly information. Thus the technology became political. Before too long this radical potential erupted. In 1517 Martin Luther published copies of a list of arguments that directly challenged the Church and its practices. For centuries disgruntled clerics had made similar arguments, but Luther had the technology on his side. Luther's thesis let loose the Reformation and the rise of Protestantism. While the Church undeniably lost the monopoly, they managed to control key forms of information and the power that accompanied them. Rules changed, and power shifted, but the patterns that had dominated before Gutenberg's time remained solidly in place.

**The book is essentially about frontier stories.** It begins with Portuguese voyagers, follows the development of telegraph and radio, and then turns to the advent of satellite television and the Internet. Part of the book's intent is simply to tell these stories, for they are fascinating in their own right. The broader intent, though, is to use these stories to link current developments along the technological frontier back to their rightful ancestors. The stories presented here are all about communication, about bring information from one spot to another. Communication is the sinew of both commerce and politics, the channel through which information -- and thus power and profits -- flows.

**This is also a book about ideas**, about how markets get established and how firms and governments together shape their creation. Business is inherently political and politics has always been marked by the interests of commerce. The overlap is everywhere, but it is particularly strong along the edges of the technological frontier. It is here that markets are actually created, where industries spring to life and then settle eventually into some kind of ordered existence. As this process unwinds, power is distributed and structures are established. In fact, it is precisely the lack of established regulations that makes the technological frontier so political. In order for commerce to grow in any uncharted territory there need to be rules. Without these rules, commerce may still emerge, but it will not flourish. This is a powerful lesson of history and a tragedy that still affects large swaths of the global economy. History provides a sense of perspective that cannot possibly exist in the present; it displays patterns that can appear only once the dust of the frontier has settled and pioneers have moved on. It appears that life along the frontier moves through four distinct phases, each of which has its own rhythm and speed:

- **Phase 1: Innovation.** Most of the excitement that surrounds a technology during its earliest days is from enthusiasts, people who treasure innovation simply for what it does, rather than for any commercial potential. Most of other people tend to ignore technological breakthroughs or even disdain them.
- **Phase 2: Commercialization.** People now can see how the technology will transfer to a mass market and what kinds of profits can be made from it. Tempted by the dual visions of anarchy and wealth, entrepreneurs of all sorts rush onto the frontier to stake their claims. Speed is essential during this phase, as is a certain ability to see beyond the confines of established business practice. They want to grad "land", to stake a claim and call it their own, even if the property rights to this land are not yet fully secure and the commercial prospects are uncertain. Pirates come too, following naturally in the footsteps of the pioneers and often blending in easily with them. Many pioneers are not particularly concerned about ownership. Instead they simply want to attack the frontier as quickly as they can, creating a market before others have had time to arrive.
- **Phase 3: Creative anarchy.** The more people who arrive on these frontiers, the harder it becomes for any of them to flourish. The more established pioneers will petition for property rights, seeking to regain the solitude that success demands. Meanwhile, people begin to value standardization over specificity. If the technologies are to develop into a full-fledged markets, they need to develop some set of common standards, some means of coordinating their systems. As the pioneers race into a new market, each armed with his or her own technology and vision of the future, they may actually exacerbate the coordination problem that they desperately need to solve. Frustratingly, the nascent industry is caught by the inevitable struggles of its own success.
- **Phase 4: Rules.** Once the pioneers realize the cost of chaos, they begin to lobby for what they once explicitly rejected. Admittedly, it is not always the pioneers who clamor for rules. In general, though, rules get created because private firms want them. In many ways, this book is about rules, about why rules get established along the technological frontier, and who plays the greatest role in their creation.

## The First Wave

## The Code Makers

## Radio Days

## New Waves of Television
